XXVII. Trembling on the Trail.
The adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night. Four times he had
his hands on that rich treasure, and four times it wasted to nothingness in his fingers,
as sleep forsook him, and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune.
As he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he noticed
that they seemed curiously subdued and far away, somewhat as if they had happened in
another world, or in a time long gone by. Then it occurred to him that the great adventure
must be a dream. There was one very strong argument in favour of this idea, namely, that
the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen as much as fifty
dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and stationed in life,
in that he imagined that all references to hundreds and thousands were mere fanciful
forms of speech, and that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed
for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in
any one's possession. If his notions of hidden treasure had been analysed, they would have
been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable
dollars.
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of
thinking them over, and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the
might not have been a dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch
a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck.
Huck was sitting on the gunnel of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water
and looking very melancholy. Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the subject. If he
did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream.
Hello, Huck.
Hello, yourself.
Silence for a minute.
Tom, if we'd left the blamed tools at the dead tree, we'd have got the money. Oh, ain't
it awful!
Taint a dream, then! Taint a dream! Somehow I most wish it was. Dogged if I don't, Huck.
What ain't a dream?
Oh, that thing yesterday! I'd been half-thinking it was. Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke
down, you'd have seen how much dream it was. I've had dreams enough all night, with that
patch-eyed Spanish devil going for me all through him. Rot him!
No, not rot him! Find him! Track the money! Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't
have only one chance for such a pile, and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if
I was to see him, anyway.
Well, so'd I. But I'd like to see him anyway. Track him out. To his number two.
Number two, yes, that's it. I've been thinking about that. But I can't make nothing out
of it. What do you reckon it is?
I don't know. It's too deep.
Say, Huck, maybe it's the number of a house.
Goodie! No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this one-horse town. There ain't
no numbers here.
Well, that's so. Let me think a minute. Here, it's the number of a room, in a tavern, you
know.
Oh, that's the trick. There ain't only two taverns. We can find out quick. You stay here,
Huck, till I come.
Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public places. He was gone
half an hour. He found that in the best tavern, number two had long been occupied by a young
lawyer and was still so occupied. In the less ostentatious house, number two was a mystery.
The tavern keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw
anybody go into it or come out of it except at night. He did not know any particular reason
for this state of things, had had some little curiosity, but it was rather feeble, had made
the most of the mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that the room was haunted, had
noticed that there was a light in there the night before.
That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very number two we're after.
I reckon it is, Tom. Now, what you going to do?
Let me think.
Tom thought a long time. Then he said,
I'll tell you. The back door of that number two is the door that comes out into the little
close alley between the tavern and the old rattle-trap of a brick store. Now, you get
hold of all the door-keys you can find, and I'll nip all of Anty's, and the first dark
night we'll go there and try him. And mind you, keep a look out for Injun Joe, because
he said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get his
revenge. If you see him, you just follow him, and if he don't go to that number two, that
ain't the place.
Lordy, I don't want to follow him by myself.
Why, it'll be a night, sure. He might never see you. And if he did, maybe he'd never think
anything.
Well, if it's pretty dark, I reckon I'll track him.
I don't know. I don't know.
I'll try.
You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might have found out that you couldn't
get his revenge and be going right after that money.
It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll follow him. I will, by jingos.
Now you're talking! Don't you ever weaken Huck, and I won't.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
In the lair of Injun Joe.
That night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung about the neighborhood
of the tavern until after nine, one watching the alley at a distance, and the other the
door. Nobody entered the alley or left it. Nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or
left the tavern door. The night promised to be a fair one, so Tom went home with the understanding
that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck was to come and mow, whereupon
he would slip out and try the keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his
watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hog's head about twelve.
Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wednesday. But Thursday night promised better.
Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern and a large towel to blindfold
it with. He hid the lantern in Huck's sugar hog's head, and the watch began. An hour before
midnight the tavern closed up, and its lights, the only ones thereabouts, were put out.
No Spaniard had been seen. Nobody entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious.
The blackness of darkness reigned. The perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional
mutterings of distant thunder. Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hog's head, wrapped
it closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern. Huck
stood sentry, and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a season of waiting
anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a mountain. He began to wish he could
a flash from the lantern. It would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom
was alive yet. It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have fainted.
Maybe he was dead. Maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement. In his uneasiness
Huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley, fearing all sorts of dreadful
things and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath.
There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimble-fuls, and
his heart would soon wear itself out the way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash
of light and Tom came tearing by him.
"'Run!' said he. "'Run for your life!'
He needn't have repeated it. Once was enough. Huck was making thirty or forty miles an hour
before the repetition was uttered. The boys never stopped till they reached the shed of
a deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the village. Just as they got within its
shelter the storm burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath he said,
"'Huck, it was awful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could, but they seemed to
make such a power of a racket that I couldn't hardly get my breath, I was so scared. They
wouldn't turn in the lock either. Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of
the knob and open comes the door. It warn't locked. I hopped in and shook off the towel
and—'Great Caesar's Ghost!'
"'What? What you see, Tom?'
"'Huck, I most stepped on to Injun Joe's hand.'
"'No.'
"'Yes. He was laying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch on his eye and
his arms spread out. Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?'
"'No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and started.'
"'I'd never thought of the towel, I bet.'
"'Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it.'
"'Say, Tom, did you see that box?'
"'Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see the cross. I didn't
see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by Injun Joe. Yes, and I saw two
barrels and lots more bottles in the room.'
"'Don't you see, now? What's the matter with that haunted room?'
"'How?'
"'Why, it's haunted with whiskey. Maybe all the Temperance Taverns have got a haunted
room, hey, Huck?'
"'Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd a thought such a thing. But say, Tom, now's
a mighty good time to get that box if Injun Joe's drunk.'
"'It is that. You try it.' Huck shuddered.
"'Well, no, I reckon not.'
"'And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't enough. If there'd
been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it.' There was a long pause for reflection,
and then Tom said,
"'Looky here, Huck, let's not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe's not in there.
It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll be dead sure to see him go out, some
time or other, and then we'll snatch that box quicker in lightning.'
"'Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every night, too, if
you'll do the other part of the job.'
"'All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a block and mow,
and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window and that'll fetch me.'
"'Agreed. And good as wheat.'
"'Now, Huck, the storm's over and I'll go home. It'll begin to be daylight in a couple
hours. You go back and watch that long, will you?'
"'I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll hant that tavern every night for a year. I'll sleep
all day and I'll stand watch all night.'
"'That's all right. Now, where are you going to sleep?'
In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man, Uncle Jake. I tote
water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little
something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, because
I don't ever act as if I was above him. Sometimes I sit right down and eat with him. But you
needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to
do as a steady thing. Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep. I
won't come bothering round. Any time you see something's up in the night, just skip right
around and mow.'
End of chapter 28